that's happening one thing you have to
remember whenever you have big fire
situation it's always caused by the
weather the saying as mother nature
starts the fires of mother nature puts
them out and that's very true in this
case you've got your unprecedented high
temperatures lower humidity's and high
winds when you have that combination in
a fire prone area you're going to get
fires and they're going to be big and
they're going to be difficult to control
mother nature often starts these fires
with high winds high heat and low
humidity and she will decide when they
go out once it rains you get cooler
temperatures and higher humidity and
eventually winter comes and just as the
snow flies and that puts them out the
other interesting thing in in Russia
when I was there my impression was that
they do a lot more with less than we
have in the United States we've got fire
retardant clothing they don't have that
we've got lots of customized mechanical
equipment to help on the fire line and
they don't have that so they're doing
the best they can the situation is when
you're in once in a hundred year event
like this heat wave is you're going to
get fires and you're going to have to
deal with that and if you've gone for
years without big fires you get
complacent maybe you're not prepared for
this and it's difficult to be prepared
in fact it's impossible to be prepared
for a once in a hundred year event like
this so the best you can do is heard the
fire around when you've got fires like
this there that are caused by a once in
a hundred year event
you can't put fires out people can't put
fires out all you can do is hurt them
around so you got to look at what's in
the fires path you got to look at homes
look at structures and maybe set some
backfires so that's where your lighting
the fuel at an anchor point and it's
burning towards the fire therefore
giving you a wider fire break your
burning all the fuel between you and the
approaching fire you're also looking at
the removing fuel right you're taking it
may be cutting down trees making a fire
break trying to hold it at a road so the
best you can do is hurt it around you
can't really put it out when you're in
this kind of situation if the fire is
continually moving on so you've got to
move with it but you can't forget to mop
up so where the fire has been through
that black edge unless the fire is put
out all the way through that it could
reignite again the winds can change
direction and then you've got another
you got a fire where it was once out
you've got a new fire so that's very
tricky you're also got to be you don't
want to get out ahead of the fire
because you know you want to be in front
of it you know you want to start at the
flank start up to fight a fire you want
to start at the heel and then
work your way up across the flanks
towards the head and try and pinch it
off but in these fires especially when
they're wind-driven you end up with
hundreds of spot fires out ahead of it
and to try and keep your handle and
getting those out can be very dangerous
and very tricky now the over 500 fires
that are burning across Russia right now
are not going to have firefighters in
every one of them what you're probably
going to have as firefighters on the
ones that are most closest to structures
and people and property some of them are
just going to be left unattended because
they will probably burn into other fires
some of those five hundred fires are big
but probably most of them are smaller in
comparison so if you're going to fly
over it and look at an aerial map you'd
say you'd kind of triage the situation
need to say okay some of these i'm going
to let we're going to let burn because
they're going to burn into the burnin to
another fire that was already there
often when you've got that many fires
it's caused by lightning where lightning
is moved through an area and drops
hundreds or thousands of lightning
strikes the big problem in Moscow due to
the smog and the smoke is these peat bog
fighters peat fires are a peat is dead
vegetation several feet thick and fire
gets down in there and it smolders down
in there
and if the peat is dry it will go
several feet underground and just
smolder and burn it what comes out of
there is nothing but smoke and smoke and
smoke and more smoke when a fire burns
very efficiently it puts off less smoke
but when it's burning like a cigarette
very inefficiently like it is down in
these peat bogs it puts off a ton of
smoke and they're impossible to get out
because how you going to get water down
that deep part of the problem with this
these high temperatures is there's a
drought so the peat bogs are dry and you
get fire down in there and boy those are
difficult to get out and you're going to
be dealing with a smoke problem for a
long time unless the winds change or it
gets covered up with snow or you've got
a tree stump that was in within a few 10
or 20 feet from a fire line you have to
remove that stump that burned stump
because the fire will smolder through
the roots and come up on the green side
of the fire will go underneath the fire
line and come up on the green side the
next season and start a fire so there's
a tremendous amount of effort put into
the hundred feet around the perimeter of
a wildfire or a forest fire in the
United States to make sure that doesn't
happen all of the old fire dogs that I
talked to about fire they all say
they're over the last several years
fires have become
have exhibited more fire behavior more
extreme fire behavior and
and become more dangerous and more
frequent over the last several years
in us in Russia we're seeing right now
these incredibly hot temperatures which
lend themselves towards drying out
vegetation and this time of year the
other thing you got to remember is that
they are so far north they get daylight
for a long time so you get a lot of
radiant heating and drying from the Sun
in those northern latitudes that you
don't get in other parts of the world so
that dries out stuff even further so yes
when you've got these hot dry
temperatures you're going to have more
fires and if the earth gets warmer
you're going to have more fires februari
7th 2009 in Australia 173 people died in
one afternoon it was the hottest day in
Australia's history and they were
predicting it the day before yet what
happened was this catastrophe
and Australia it tends to be a
bellwether for climate change and I
think we're going to have a lot more
fires and more severe fires in the years
to come
when I was in Russia and working with
the Russian smokejumpers it became very
clear to me that these are tough
sons-of-bitches these are the toughest
firefighters on the planet they work
incredibly hard with very little
resources you know you can do it for a
couple weeks at a time three weeks maybe
but but you're pretty much fried at the
end of those three weeks there are long
days with daylight most of the time and
it's exhausting it's just exhausting and
but these guys are able to do it you
know it's what they live for and they
they just love being outside and in the
woods and I have a huge degree of
respect for the Russian smokejumpers